...say bye-bye...
Narrator:
Children's experiences
during their first five years
are more consequential
than we ever thought.
Woman:
We know that the brain
develops the most
in the first five years of
By age 6, 95% of a child's brain
is already developed.
By age 6!
So these early years
are very very important.
Narrator:
And of all people,
not just parents,
pediatricians and teachers,
but economists
are paying attention.
Man:
Neural synaptic connections
are occurring in a child's brain
age zero to three
at a rate of 700 a second.
The worst fallacy in
this business
is to assume that the abilities,
the motivations,
the skills of people are fixed
at birth - they are not.
Dugger:
What happens in that
36-month period is important
as far as whether a child
is going to be trusting
and curious, and active
and able to interact with
other people in a
productive way.
Heckman:
What I came to understand
was that ability
was multiple in nature,
that you could actually start,
even at the earliest years,
and increase the possibilities
of individuals for their life.
So that became
very exciting to me.
(children screaming
in excitement)
It's moving!
You woke it up!
Man:
Here I am,
at the Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis,
my expertise is
pre-Civil War banking,
I worried a lot about
business cycles
and financial crises,
and unemployment
and inflation.
How does somebody
with that background
get involved with
early childhood,
prenatal to five?
You have to figure out
what's the best investment?
It's going to be early
childhood education.
Making sure these kids
start healthy
and ready to learn.
Narrator:
Science has demonstrated
that a child's earliest
experiences are vital
to building the foundation
for life-long individual success
in school and in life.
We can put dollar values
on almost anything...
Narrator:
Economists are adding new data
to this argument,
studying two initiatives
in particular:
high-quality early care
and preschool,
calculating how much they cost,
and how much they pay off
to our economy.
And they're worried.
Not because we're spending
too much,
but because we're spending
too little
where it matters most.
Rolnick:
You can make moral arguments
for Higher Ed, for K-12,
for reducing crime,
for reducing pollution.
But policy makers need more
than moral arguments.
We asked
a very direct question
that most economists
or business people would ask:
"What was the return
on the investment?"
Narrator:
The first study to catch
the attention of Rolnick and
other economists
was from a high quality
early childhood experiment
for low-income children
in Ypsilanti, Michigan,
called Perry Preschool.
Founded in 1962,
Perry Preschool grew out
of the spirit of that time-
the growth of the
civil rights movement,
desegregation
and equal opportunity.
The Perry children
had master's level teachers
and low
student-to-teacher ratios.
Educators even visited the
families at home every week.
Polk:
The children that were receiving
the Perry intervention
received three hours per day
of a cognitively rich
preschool program.
They focus on things
such as math,
literacy, play-based
approaches,
focus on engaging
their imagination
and their own investment
in their learning.
Narrator:
The Perry kids
were compared to
a group of their peers,
a control group,
who weren't in the program.
Both groups have been
followed for 40 years.
Rolnick:
They found that the children
that were in
the high-quality program
were less likely to be retained
in the first grade,
were less likely
to need special ed,
were more likely to be literate
by the sixth grade,
graduate high school, get a job,
pay taxes, start a family.
And the crime rate
between the two groups,
the randomized group
and the control group,
the crime rate
goes down 50%.
So those looked like
pretty good outcomes!
They became what we think of as
model citizens in our country,
despite their modest beginnings.
Narrator:
And those outcomes
equal hard dollars.
The program was expensive.
But economists calculated
the benefits:
the Perry students
were more likely
to stay on track in school,
have higher skilled jobs
and contribute more in taxes,
and less likely
to incur the social costs
of welfare and prison.
Polk:
The youngest children
of the Perry Preschool studies
are now 52
and the oldest children of the
Perry Preschool studies
are now 56.
So we've been following children
from the Perry Preschool
experiment for 50 years.
What did we learn?
Many things.
It's very successful
in terms of the economic
performance of the children.
For each dollar invested,
you get back somewhere between
7% and 10% per annum
over the lifetime of the child.
Which is a huge rate of return.
Narrator:
That translates,
depending on the study,
to a payoff of $7 to $16
for every dollar spent
on the program.
Heckman:
What we found is
some of those same traits
that are starting to
be fostered early in life -
solving problems but also
getting along with others
and basically planning
in a wise way-
pay off,
and pay off substantially.
Narrator:
Yet, despite the benefits,
today, public investment
in affordable,
high-quality programs
like Perry
is so low, only a fraction of
our children can attend them.
But up north,
just across the U.S. border,
one place took note
of the lessons
offered by the Perry model.
Twenty years ago,
Quebec was the poorest
province in Canada.
It was stuck in a recession,
and one-quarter of its citizens
lived in poverty.
The Prime Minister was alarmed
by skyrocketing
social welfare costs.
He asked psychologist
Camil Bouchard
to head a task force
to come up with solutions.
Bouchard and his
friend Lyse Brunet,
a feminist and
political activist,
became allies in a growing
political movement.
Brunet:
In those days in Quebec,
there was a lot of marches
in the street,
and it was a context, I think,
where the women's movement
was very strong,
and it was really the women
who put forward
the daycare issues.
Narrator:
Nine years later,
investments in high quality
early childcare programs
became central
to Bouchard's strategy
for reining in Quebec's
rising social costs.
His team was inspired -
ironically enough -
by research coming out
of the United States.
Bouchard found
the evidence compelling.
And not just Perry Preschool,
but also Abecedarian,
an intensive
experiment like Perry,
this one in North Carolina,
which ran for five years.
It provided infant and
toddler care,
as well as preschool.
One gain?
Kids from the program
were four times as likely
to graduate from college.
The kids in the treatment group
were no smarter.
But you could measure
their performance in class,
and later ratings of how
successful they are
in controlling their anger,
dealing with
their fellow students,
negotiating with each other.
Narrator:
Economists calculated all
the costs and benefits
30 years later.
The net return to society?
Nearly $100,000 for every child.
The Canadians also studied
the Child Parent Center,
a special half-day pilot program
for low-income preschool
children in Chicago.
The net return to society
in reduced social costs alone
from the Chicago program was
more than $84,000 per child.
Bouchard:
It was pretty clear that
in applying that type
of social programs
we would have success
in diminishing the vulnerability
of our children.
It was inspiring also because
the methodology was beautiful.
Narrator:
Bouchard and his team
looked to the U.S. research
and asked themselves:
Could investing in
young children
and their families improve
personal outcomes
and reap economic
benefits in Quebec?
They were convinced it could,
and released a report
with 53 recommendations.
Bouchard:
But the main thrust of it was
that we were to approach
the problems
well before they manifest
themselves, well before.
We had decided that
the government should invest
in the period from 0 to 5.
If you had to choose,
this is where you had
to start with.
Narrator:
When Bouchard and his team
released the report in 1992,
the public reaction
was ecstatic.
Bouchard:
The title of the report
was kind of smashing-
"We're Crazy About Our Kids,"
Quebec Fou de Ses Enfants.
I was just astonished
at how many reporters,
from all over the place
was at the press conference,
for a governmental report.
And there was something special,
there was a buzz
around the title.
Narrator:
Advocates for children
were galvanized.
Bouchard:
We met with very, very,
very involved people
and interested people
in the community.
They had read the report,
they were ready to do something.
And there was an enormous
pressure on the government
to create something significant.
If you just put the report
on the table
and then say to government:
"You should do that," and go
to fishing or hunting
or to do something else,
it won't happen.
You have to have a constituency
around the report.
It was, like, little projects
for a couple of months
and after that, they wouldn't
have any money to continue.
So it was step-by-step
asking the government
to put in place a real
strong system.
Narrator:
By 1997, advocates
had broad support,
and the government
started a childcare system
intended for any family
in Quebec.
The tuition: five dollars a day.
It would cost almost a
billion dollars
in the first year alone,
and no one knew if it
would actually
reduce poverty and social costs.
Woman:
Investing in early childhood
is a no-brainer at this point.
But when you start
a network like that,
knowing not only the initial
investment to get it going
and really the structural change
that you're putting in place,
and the annual recurring cost,
there are a lot of risks.
(speaks French)
Narrator:
Any Robillard directs
a child development center,
known as a CPE,
in the Montreal neighborhood
of Villeray.
Today, sixteen years later,
parents pay seven dollars a day.
Narrator:
Most every afternoon
Alexi Chartrand,
a freelance media producer,
picks up his son Vladimir.
Narrator:
CPE spots are coveted-
there still aren't enough
to go around.
Vladimir was on a waiting list
for two years.
Alexi:
It's actually,
it's like a call from God.
I have tons of friends that
are on the list and waited.
When they called us...
at first we didn't believe it,
because normally most
of my friends
called before they
have their child
so, "Oh, you're pregnant!
All right, let's call."
Narrator:
Alexi's wife Veronique works
part-time in the evenings,
and by day pursues
her education.
The CPE system has
turned out to be
a good investment for Vladimir,
but also for his family.
Veronique's schooling will
boost her family's
life-long income
and well-being.
If Vladimir had not gotten
a spot at a CPE,
none of this would
have been possible.
Narrator:
Quebec's childcare system
is costly, and most
of the returns
will pay out when
children grow up.
But one benefit
appeared right away.
Woman:
We used to have a lower
labor force participation
compared to the rest of Canada,
but since the new family policy,
we have surpassed
the rest of Canada.
Now, having mothers with young
children in the labor force
is very beneficial
for the government,
because people paying
income tax
are less dependent on
government subsidies
and hence, for every dollar
that is invested
in the childcare system
the government gets back
about a dollar and four cents,
so it pays for itself.
Narrator:
Affordable childcare is not
the only investment
Quebec makes in its families.
Bylaw, all mothers can take
40 weeks of paid maternity leave
at 75% of their salary,
and most of the leave
can be shared with the father.
But that's not all...
Mothers receive free
universal pre- and
post-natal care and services.
Businesses must
provide flex-time
and nursing breaks for mothers.
James:
You have common situations
of parents being able
to take up to year off
and the
participation of fathers,
because you can share
their times into that,
has changed the dynamic
in so many ways.
That, too, is important
and can't be neglected.
Alexi:
This time is so important.
They're so small, and you're
not going to live that again,
so I think it's important just
to live this with your child.
Narrator:
Only 60% of Quebec's
children have access
to subsidized childcare spaces,
and the demand keeps growing.
While it's too early to measure
how these kids
will fare as adults,
the short-term social
benefits are promising.
Japel:
Having more mothers,
participating in the
labor force,
of course the income goes
So that's why Quebec
has the lowest rate
of children growing up
in poverty.
There's still lots
of people waiting
so we still have
to develop spaces,
and we have to work
on quality.
Narrator:
Family policy in Quebec
has wide support.
No politician would dare try
to dismantle it.
More and more, the U.S.
has become an outlier
in its child and
family policies.
Every other rich nation
guarantees paid maternal leave,
and many offer paid leave
for fathers as well.
Most provide
affordable childcare
or free preschool for
all children.
Like Perry, teachers usually
have a degree in education.
(singing in Chinese)
And now China is applying
the lessons of Perry Preschool,
Abecedarian and Chicago -
investing billions in
early education.
Dugger:
In years traveling in East Asia
and elsewhere in the world,
top people managing
large amounts of resources
asked me again and again,
"Rob, why are Americans
not investing
in their own children?"
And I tried my best to explain,
but their answer back to me was,
"Rob, this makes no sense -
this is nuts!"
Heckman:
A month ago I was in Beijing,
and what really encouraged me
was that as part of their
long-run planning policy
to reduce poverty in China,
they were starting to develop
early childhood programs.
It sees early childhood
and sees their whole policy
towards early years
as being fundamental for
its success in the future.
Narrator:
If research from
our own country's experiments
is inspiring governments
around the world,
why haven't we applied
these lessons ourselves?
It's not for lack of trying.
Back in 1971,
Congress passed a bill
offering comprehensive,
high-quality
childcare and other services
for a//American children -
birth to age five.
It was vetoed
by President Nixon.
n the decades since,
most childcare in America
has remained a patchwork,
too often tough to find,
hard to afford,
and mediocre in quality.
Only one in ten
childcare centers
across the country
is accredited.
California inspects cemeteries
more often
than child-care facilities.
And the price families pay
can be staggering.
Spots at Head Start and other
subsidized programs are limited,
while private center-based care
for a four-year-old
can run $12,000 a year
or more.
Families are expected
to do it alone.
Yet other sectors of our society
receive billions in
state support.
When we considered a
new location
for our headquarters,
Virginia presented
a great business case
for assuring a
Rolnick:
Economic development,
the way it is conventionally
practiced in this country
is seriously flawed.
I'm talking billions of dollars,
and the return is
virtually zero.
Narrator:
Across the nation,
cities and states
compete for each other's jobs -
enticing companies
with tax breaks,
land and other subsidies.
Come to Texas!
We're wide open for business!
When we allow cities and states
to try to lure each other's
companies with subsidies,
from a national perspective,
not one new job is created.
...the Texas enterprise fund...
Narrator:
In 2011, this cost taxpayers
more than $80 billion -
enough to fund more than
5,000 child development centers
for 10 years.
Instead, most states have
cut their investments
in child development programs.
Dugger:
When we say
that we have a budget crisis,
it's not a shortage of money
that we're talking about.
There's plenty of money.
This is lobbying power,
which assures that
our political system
continues to try to keep
the spending patterns unchanged.
Rolnick:
The economics of it
just doesn't hold up.
You want to make sure you have
sustainable economic growth,
invest in your kids.
Everyone's saying, earlier,
the better.
It's more efficient.
If you wait, it's going to cost
you a lot more money, and you're
going to fail a lot more.
Dugger:
We are not producing
the workforce we need.
We are producing a large,
large number of people
who are going to be unable
to compete effectively on
a global basis.
And we create
a two-tiered society,
so we say to those kids:
"Sorry, we're not
going to help,"
even though we know
how to help
and we can do it
in an effective way.
We know it has a great return
on investment.
We know it helps children's
life-long learning.
Why do we not do it?
It's a question
I ask myself daily.
Narrator:
Despite everything we know,
most states still
confront fiscal
challenges the old
fashioned way-
offering subsidies to business
while cutting back
on social services
including child development.
When Utah Republican
State Senator Aaron Osmond
was appointed to the state's
education committee,
what he found sent him
in a different direction.
Senator Osmond:
Our special education growth
is outpacing our normal
student growth.
We're spending a lot of money
on special education
without the outcomes
that we really want.
Narrator:
Nationwide, special education
is provided for children
with developmental delays.
In Utah,
the costs were spiraling.
When Senator Osmond
went looking for solutions,
one school district stood out.
Granite District
in Salt Lake City is large
and many of its families live
in extreme poverty.
n 2006,
the district decided to invest
in high quality early education,
like Perry Preschool had
40 years earlier.
Woman:
Children coming from
at-risk family situations,
often look like children
who have disability,
and yet what they really have
is a lack of opportunity.
Narrator:
Many of these kids
come from homes
where English is not spoken
and in the past, would have been
steered to special education.
Osmond:
What impressed me most
about their preschool program,
was how engaged
these young children were
in the educational process...
This one is "0"...
Can you say "0"?
Osmond:
...and how organized that
the entire set-up was.
Is this the letter "0"?
Osmond:
These teachers knew exactly
what was going on,
the kids knew
and they were participating
in the process.
I always tell our staff
that I know that we're
right on target
and the kids are
right there with you,
when they're kind of coming
up out of their seats
and they're leaning forward
and want to get to the teacher.
The letter's "A"...
Van Gorder:
We know we've got them
engaged in an activity,
when you're engaged,
you're learning.
Narrator:
The children were given
standardized tests
at the start of preschool
and their progress has been
carefully calculated.
238 children -
a third of all tested -
scored so low they would likely
need special education
when entering elementary school.
But after two years in Granite's
high quality early
education program,
only 11 of those 238 students
were assigned to special ed.
Jason, Rey, Diego and Maria were
among the low-scoring students.
They are in 5th grade now,
and have been testing as well
in math and language arts
as the kids
in high-income schools.
The first time I did it, I got
11 minutes and 26 seconds.
And the second time,
I got 8 minutes.
At first when he gives us
the homework,
I look at it, and I think,
do I know this or do I not?
Will I need help
or will I just do it by myself?
And then once I get home,
I've already thought about it.
Teacher:
How many of you are planning
to get that alumni award?
Van Gorder:
Allot these four children
were in a range where
they were potentially eligible
for special education
at that moment...
My mom wanted to move me
to another school,
but I'm like,
"No, please - please.
We didn't put them
in special ed.
Woman:
We found that over four years
the state alone
saved $1.4 million,
and if you include
the federal savings,
it was an additional
$1.1 million,
for a total combined state
and federal savings of
$2.5 million.
Osmond:
We have an opportunity
to mainstream these students
and save significant dollars
down the road.
And there is the
statistical historical
evidence that it will work.
Narrator:
In the face of
ongoing opposition,
Senator Osmond continues
to push forward two bills,
one to start more
pilot preschools,
the other to keep them
all sustainable.
Osmond:
The concept of
sustainable financing
is allocating
budget right now as a set-aside
to be able to reinvest again
in the future
based on future savings that
you hope that you will realize,
thus creating kind
of cyclical nature
that there is always
funding available
for this particular program.
reality is, though,
that we still need to prove
to the legislature
and to many groups in the state
that that investment
is worth it.
It seems like we do a lot
of this early intervention,
but it seems to wash out
by the time students get in the
seventh or eighth grade.
And let's...
I'd like to find out why
that's the case.
We're not seeing the washouts.
Not only are they
not washing out,
they're still at the top
of their class.
They left preschool and entered
kindergarten at the top,
and they are maintaining
at the top.
Narrator:
And if they're maintaining
at the top,
Granite district's
preschool program
is reversing a seemingly
intractable national trend,
where the
achievement gap between
high-income and
low-income children
has widened by 40% since 1970.
Janis:
A 22-point gap
between low-income
and high-income schools
in the Granite School District
in language arts
was reduced for the preschoolers
to a five-point gap.
It's so compelling you cannot
avoid having the conversation:
"Why not invest early?"
Narrator:
High quality child-care
and preschool is just one
of the solution.
Polk:
Early childcare education
is not a panacea.
You have to have clean,
safe neighborhoods, good food,
good communities, you have
a support system around us all.
Narrator:
Economists are clear
about the equation:
our system is paying
for failure,
rather than
investing in success.
Not just one study, there
are actually four
independent longitudinal
studies on early ed,
all getting very, very high
annual rates of return.
Narrator:
The question is,
What will we do about it?
How much are we willing
to invest for the long term?
When are we going to get crazy
about our kids?